The development of computer text processing started in earnest with
Kleene's formalizing what is a regular language. Such regular
expressions could then became a mini-program, complete with a
compilation process, available to perform any edit, once that language
was extended. Similarly, filters are extended by evolving particular
options.

An editor essentially invokes an input stream and directs it to the
text processing environment, which is either a command shell or a text
editor. The resulting output is applicable to further text processing,
the final result of which is comparable to a single application of an
algorithm applied once by a more sophisticated and structured computer
program.

Text processing is, unlike an algorithm, is a manually administered
sequence of simpler macros that are the pattern-action expressions and
filtering mechanisms. In either case the programmer's intention is
impressed indirectly upon a given set of textual characters in the act
of text processing. The results of a text processing step are
sometimes only hopeful, and the attempted mechanism is often subject
to multiple drafts through visual feedback, until the regular
expression or markup language details, or until the utility options,
are fully mastered.

Text processing is concerned mostly with producing textual characters
at the highest level of computing, where its activities are just below
the practical uses of computingâ€”the manual transmission of
information.

Ultimately all computing is text processing, from the self-compiling
textual characters of an assembler, through the automated programming
language generated to handle a blob of graphical data, and finally to
the metacharacters of regular expressions which groom existing text
documents.

Text processing is its own automation.

Textual characters come in standardized character sets containing also
control characters such a newline character, which arrange text. Other
types of control characters arrange the transmission, define the
character sets, and perform other housekeeping tasks.
